Welcome to Cloud Native Compass,
a podcast to help you navigate the vast
landscape of the cloud native ecosystem.
We're your hosts. I'm David Flanagan, a technology
magpie that can't stop playing with new shiny
things. I'm Laura Santa Maria, a forever learner
who is constantly breaking production.
If you want to learn about how the
cloud native and container developer experience is broken
and how WebAssembly can bring substantial improvements to
your day to day,
then this is the episode for you. Today,
we're chatting with Laszlo Fugas, a self proclaimed
WebAssembly skeptic.
Laszlo responded to one of my tweets shelling
WebAssembly,
and we decided to get together and share
our opinions.
Let's get to it.
So, Laszlo, could you please tell us a
little bit about you? Yeah. Of course, David.
First of all, thank you for having me.
And it's good to see you guys, Laura
and David. So I am Laszlo Fogosh. I
am based in Budapest,
and I'm running a small company, a small
bootstrapped startup called Gimlet.
It's basically a GitHub space application delivery platform.
You know, many teams are building platforms these
days, and it's it's the era that we
are building platforms. And that's what that's what
what I was doing previously.
I was a consultant building these platforms and
now I we put, all the knowledge and
all the best practices into this tool called
Gimlet.
We have a SaaS and it's open source
and you can go and check it out.
And, yeah, that's about me probably.
Alright. Thank you. So today's conversation came around
because
I was being lazy and looking to Twitter
for to review my abstracts for events that
I was speaking at. And the abstract was
around
me trying to talk about
not in a clickbait way, but, like, what
cloud native two point o is gonna look
like because I don't think that it's entirely
container based.
And I've been doing a lot with WebAssembly.
And you responded to my tweet and you
called yourself a self professed WebAssembly skeptic. Yes.
And I thought, you know what? That's a
really balanced conversation
where I am not bullish on WebAssembly, but
I'm definitely
leaning that way.
And I thought it'd be good just to
have those two points of view. And, you
know, we've also got a lot of others
and I wanna know where you used to
land on the WebAssembly.
I don't know, fence per se.
I am
probably a little more cautiously optimistic
just because I I've I've seen a lot.
I've heard a lot about it. I do
feel like there's a hype train going on,
just a little bit. And I think I
know who's driving said hype train. David.
But, you know, that's that's okay. However, I
do think that
there is definitely a need for what it's
doing.
Unfortunately,
with the world of manifests and all kinds
of chaos and
different things that Docker really brought to our
whole world. And you think about just how
much YAML we write
on a daily basis.
And that's when you have this moment of,
like, please someone save me from YAML and
pages and pages and pages of it. Maybe
that's just me, skeptical
old sysadmin that I can be. So Alright.
So, I mean, then it's perfect. We've got
the left. We've got the right. We've got
the center. So we're all Right in the
middle. Right in the middle. Well, maybe a
little more pro than con, but that's okay.
It's alright. You can be less leading. I'll
take it.
But it means that as we have our
conversation today, we can discuss the pros and
cons. We can have balances. We can understand
what's important to everyone here. And then, hopefully,
you know, we all leave with the understanding
that I'm right. That's that's the ideal situation.
Or
we just, you know, throw things at our
screens and then lock everything up. I do
have my throwing device. It's okay. It's a
a pink planet.
In this visual medium that is a podcast.
It'll be on YouTube too. People can definitely
see what you're doing. I
know. I know. But someone's listening on audio
and wondering, what is he about to throw
at and this is squishy, and I can't
stop letting it go. So,
anyway, let let's let's focus. Let's not get
derailed within the first five minutes of the
episode. Right? All we've done so far is
introductions. I'm very good, Seth, though. Alright. So
I guess let's talk, actually, the abstract type
of postage of Twitter. I gave the talk
two weeks ago in Glasgow. And I'm just
gonna get, like, the quick thirty second overview
of what I think WebAssembly brings to the
table in creative architectures,
and then we'll start talking about the pros,
the cons, and, you know, take a look
at maybe where it's not a good fit.
Because, of course, it's not a catch all
tool. Right? It's it's not gonna solve all
the problems for everybody.
But if we take a look at container
based development today, and I'm gonna focus on
development and then we can talk about delivery
as well. I don't think anyone
enjoys
building micro service applications with containers
on their local machine.
And there's a few main reasons that that
really just sucks. Right? Is that containers are
not that lightweight.
We're probably using Macs or Windows,
and those have to run a virtual machine,
which then my containers run-in.
For interpreted languages, we have to sync loads
of code into that virtual machine, which is
a slow and painful process regardless of which
modern driver we're using and other virtualization features.
To the point where, like, a a standard,
not even a larger standard Python or PHP
web app can take, like, a five second
refresh and a change, and that's just not
acceptable. Right? It's not a good experience. And
that's assuming you've got one container,
but if you've got microservices,
so you're trying to run that entire thing
locally. And, like, how many containers can you
run-in your machine before it blows up? That's
probably not that many. So then the developer
experience pushes us towards,
like, shared dev containers, like, back in the
nineties and the early two thousands.
And I like shared development environments. So cool.
But then this they have to sync the
files even further or I have to build
a container and push it to a private
registry and deploy that. And, like, the whole
workflow is a mess. Now I know there's
someone listening right now who's good, just use
Linux.
I have used Linux
day in and day out since 02/2001.
And I can tell you that I like
Linux, but I've never enjoyed using Linux. Right?
It's always something. Like What did you just
admit? I mean, I was an Rk Linux
user, so no one liked me anyway. But,
you know, compiling my I three used to
be the highlight of my week and tweaking
my configs, but I was never really getting
anything done. I spent more time
nursing and playing and tweaking the config in
the box than actually doing anything that was
useful to my life or career. And, you
know, when you go to Mac, things just
work. The apps are nice. They look nice.
You're not worried about a migration from x
11 to Weyland. And I don't wanna, like,
completely segue this entire episode to be a
certain minute rant about Linux because I like
Linux. I'm just not gonna use it as
my desktop daily driver. However,
I don't know if Lazlo's looking at me
with that discontent because he's like, I run
Linux every single day. I
was gonna say I do think the most
hilarious thing about this right now is that
Lazlo's on Linux. David, you're on Mac. I'm
on Windows right now because my purse my
personal dev machine is on Linux, but my
work machine is on Windows. And so we
can have a lovely conversation about containerization
across three different operating systems and how much
of a pain that is to deal with,
especially when you're on lockdown corporate hardware.
I'm gonna add one more thing to the
frustration bucket, and then I'm gonna let you
both take it over from there. Right. So
let's move past the fact that developing microservices
on containers on a virtual machine on a
Mac or Windows desktop environment that isn't Linux
can be quite painful.
Even if you get past that and you
do run Linux, there's still challenges. One is
that what if you want to build multi
platform container images? Like, we should be these
days. Right? It's not just AMD sixty four,
but we have to accept ARM sixty four
Graviton processors, and AWS. Right? These are now
becoming more commonplace.
So you have to change your entire build
pipeline. As much as Docker wants you to
think that it's just a Docker build, it
is not. There are tweaks and things that
you need to do.
It's just painful,
especially again on my m one Mac where
I pull an image and it says, we
don't support Arm. Sorry.
And then you have to go and use
Rosette or or some other crazy workaround. So
yeah. I just don't think the experience is
great. And I have a lot of sympathy
and empathy for, like, people that are new
to this that are on their Macs, and
they're like, they just wanna get started. And
they're like, imagine your first day in a
job, and you're like, you pull you you're
I'm on Mac. You're so happy. It's, like,
amazing computer this company's given you. It's your
first day as a developer. And then you
see a warning message about not being able
to run an ARM 64 container on side
of an AMD an AMD sixty four AMD
sixty four container on an ARM 64 machine.
So difficult. Right? Well, I'm definitely hearing you.
I mean, I'm on Linux, so that that
that's that's better. But I
I occasionally have to be on those cross
platform images and ARM has been an issue
and I'm I'm doing go and sometimes I'm
getting some linker issues, which is like a
pain to debug, especially that I'm not on
Mac. So I definitely hear you, and I
do believe that there is a problem there.
You mentioned the developer inner inner loop kind
of setup that people develop inside containers.
Now, I'm doing containers since 02/2016
and, you know, developing applications
and helping people and everything.
And this inner loop, I never understood how
can people,
like, bear, like, developing in a container. It's
just not productive enough. It's like it's it's
it's not made for that. And I know
there are tools and there are,
telepresence and other tools which which you can
use and all that. But
I just I just wire my you know,
I have this component, that component, all the
boxes and the arrows between them. I just
rewire things in my head, and I just
run my processes on my laptop. So I
I don't develop inside a container.
So,
that's why perhaps my,
appreciation of containers a little bit higher than
yours that I just I just put this
problem into a box and never open it.
I think you're right. Like, I think the
local developer experience just should be native tools
as much as possible. I know we we
try to get away from that because you
don't want someone running node 16 and someone
running node 18 and someone running node 20
across the team and all getting different outcomes.
But then it doesn't really matter. Right? As
long as the test pass and you ship
a container, that's the same on every production
node. Yeah. Like, develop locally. I think that's
great. But what about and if you get
your microservices right, you can do that in
isolation for a single microservice. But is there
ever a cause, ever a need where you
need to build that, run integration test against
multiple services? Do you solely rely on automation
for that? Do you try to do it
locally? Like, what's your experience there? Yeah. So
so microservices,
I typically, like, work on just a single
service. So I'm not, like, developing 10 at
a time, and I need to recompile all
of them all the time. So, yes, occasionally,
I start up a stack,
you know, of of 10 applications
that are my immediate dependencies.
And I and I use those as like
a static dependency,
you know, could run on my laptop or
on a remote machine. So it doesn't really
matter.
Yeah.
I mean, I've dealt with enough pipelines
and running pipelines and mostly
so I've done the Docker within Docker thing
way back when,
which was hell
on three legs.
But
to me, in general, like, if you're gonna
be building any kind of containerization
and any kind of microservices system, you have
to be running some kind of pipeline to
test everything and put it all together on
the machines you're expecting it to run on
Just because there's so much
different things going on that
you're not you're gonna miss, like, this little
bit or that little bit if you're running
a system that is not the same. Like,
maybe a weird networking
error or some kind of load
concern
going across whatever system you're running. So I
don't know. Like, I can kind of see
the
we're trying to get everybody to run everything
locally and make it look nice before it
even ends up on your automation pipelines and
your testing and everything like that. But
if you don't have that pipeline, I feel
like you're completely missing out when you're dealing
with containerization
because there has to be some kind of
testing
going on in there, and there has to
be some kind of good work going on
in there if you expect your containers to
run. And, yes, if you are a brand
new dev,
it's complete chaos, you have no idea what's
going on. And you have to wait for
some engineer to come and work with you,
which is really, really disconcerting
as a beginner. Or I can see that
point. They could write WebAssembly applications.
Or they could do that. But, you know,
I don't know. Like, how much chaos is
that bringing in? Well, I mean, when you
write a WebAssembly application, there's there's no containers,
there's no virtual machine. You work natively with
your own tool chain, whether that be Rust
or Go, Python, you know, the language support
is almost ubiquitous at this point in time.
And, you know, for go and Rust, it's
just a compilation target. You just say compile
for Wasm and it's done. That's it. You
don't really need to worry about anything else.
You get some bytecode that you ship and
then OCI registry. You don't we know you're
not throwing away all the good things that
containers and that ecosystem has brought to the
developer experience. I still like the docker push,
the docker build model. Why not use it
for more stuff? In fact, we already do
it.
So I don't know. It's like I don't
think WebAssembly fits everything. I mean, get into
that. But I think the developer experience is
solved. We don't need virtual machines. We don't
need containers.
The here's another thing. We talk about microservices.
If everything was WebAssembly I don't think there's
really ever a situation where that's gonna be
true yet or maybe even in the next
ten years.
But WebAssembly's
are binaries are super lightweight. Like, the startup
time
from a Wasm runtime to running your bytecode
is under a microsecond
or under a millisecond. This measures the microseconds.
Whereas for a container, you're probably
And the best case scenario, container startup is,
like, three hundred milliseconds, four hundred milliseconds.
So it's not like for a micro service
architecture, you need to run every single container
or you would. But in WebAssembly,
you would just have little pointers to WebAssembly
batteries that could be spun up on demand
as requests flow
through your architecture.
And I think that's really powerful. I think
it opens up new patterns that we probably
haven't been able to take advantage or seen
before. Now there was promise. I don't know
if
how much attention y'all were paying in, like,
2017,
'20 '18, but the concept of Unicarnals was
pretty big. And in fact, Docker bought, like,
the Oxford based Unicarnal company.
And now we've never seen unique kernels. I
don't know if there's a correlation there, and
they wanted everyone just to use containers.
But the the promise is nice. Like, every
HTTP request that comes in, you get a
micro VM that spun up, answered it, and
shut back down. And that model works quite
well. Can I latch onto one of your
sentences
when you said, like, if you want to,
you know, compile for WebAssembly, it's just a
compiler target? And, you know, you have your
application. You compile it. It's the WebAssembly
bytecode, binary, whatever and then it just runs.
And that feels
like a very amazing scenario. So all the
things that you said, it just sounds amazing.
But my question is: can just recompile all
my application to WebAssembly
today?
Or if not today, is it really the
goal and will we reach this point in
time where we can just recompile everything and
be in this wonderful place that you described?
Yeah. Good question. Can
you take an existing application and compare it
to WebAssembly? No. It's not gonna happen. Will
it ever happen?
I don't think so. The way the server
side WebAssembly works at least is that
there's a whole bunch of abstractions via the
component model. So let me talk about WebAssembly
a little bit. WebAssembly is a very constrained
sandbox that runs in your browser. It can
run-in other places that doesn't have access to
fail systems and networking
sockets,
any of the stuff that we have to
spec from standard POSIX. Right?
Because of that, anything that's built without any
of those requirements probably could be compelled to
WebAssembly and go run-in your browser. People have
actually compelled Git to
a WebAssembly module, and they hook out to
the fetch API and the browser to get
the repository and do other stuff. However, very
cool. But we need to if we wanted
to service the WebAssembly, we we need these
things. We need sockets. We need file systems.
We need speak to databases. We need caching.
We need you know, we don't wanna throw
away service mesh and a good stuff there.
We wanna retry logic. We don't wanna build
a center applications because the WebAssembly should be
small and lightweight and compact and all these
other good things. And that's where the component
model comes in. It's like, okay. We're gonna
give you a sandbox to run your WebAssembly,
but we're gonna expose things on the outside
via these APIs.
So you have the ability to call open
on a failed scripture or close or read
or write. You have the ability to open
right now, you can't open sockets because they
go make an HTTP request or a Redis
request or a Postgres request,
means that if you want to compile existing
applications to be server side WebAssembly on these
runtimes, the way that they communicate with Redis
and HTTP and Postgres and MongoDB, all these
other good stuff would have to be conformant
to the APIs and abstractions provided by the
component model. And what I think is gonna
be a side effect here, and I haven't
seen anything to confirm this yet, but I
I really hope is that these interfaces we
have in the component model will probably filter
through to container based applications at some point.
I I think they'll they'll provide, like, a
substrate for all future application development where we
don't need to have,
you know, people build and bespoke performing MongoDB
APIs and stuff. We can
you know, if I don't know how much
of architecture geeks you are. Right? But there's
hexagonal architectures, ports and adapter architectures, that's onion
architectures, there's clean architectures. They're all the same
thing with different names that people have just
signed to promote over the last ten years.
And the component model really resembles that. It's
the ability to write a small piece of
code that says go and write something on
a database and write this file and speak
to this HTTP endpoint.
And those components can be swapped out with
any other implementation whenever you want because they're
all little LEGO bricks. And I think that
is really neat from the WebAssembly component model
stuff, and hopefully, it does leak over. Did
that answer your question?
It did. So it's it's kind of an
SDK that I have an API that I
can call to do, like, you know, important
stuff. Yeah. So
if we take, like, a Wasm runtime just
now, like Wasm time, WasmR, WasmCloud, WasmEdge, there's
a whole bunch of them. Right? Right?
You basically can just run a WebAssembly file.
We're doing
Wasm or Wasm time file, and it runs.
Right? If it doesn't use any components, it's
fine. Now if you want to enrich or
augment that runtime with new functionality, like, say,
I want to provide the ability for them
to call Postgres APIs, issue the APIs, etcetera,
then you just add on the components as
part of the bootstrap. So every WebAssembly module
that you run, you get you you kind
of remove that ambient privilege. Right? Because I'm
a POSIX container Linux based process, I can
speak to every network in the world. I
can speak to all the file systems. I
can read memory and all that stuff. But
the sandbox, you have to be very explicit
and say, actually, you can only speak HTTP.
And we only used to speak to these
domains, and you can only speak to Postgres,
but you can only speak to these tables
or these databases as issues or this all
becomes infrastructure platform stuff. Your application developers don't
care. It's just do can I can I
speak to this table? That's all I really
want. Can I get rows from it? Can
I can I pull down what is my
IP.com? Whatever. Right?
I I think that's a
a strong distinction between where we are to
see
with the service development. It's very different, but
I think it's very powerful. Gotcha. So so
let me just just explain,
like, my background. Why am I the world
the biggest WebAssembly
skeptic,
which, you know, like, like, I I I
am proudly wearing this badge, but not because
I know much about WebAssembly, but more like,
you know, when you are on Twitter and
when you're reading news, there are many things
come come come at you. And then you
have to sort of put them into little
buckets. This is important. This could be important.
This is absolutely not important. Like, you know,
you put crypto in certain boxes as well.
And then here comes WebAssembly and and then
I and, you know, as as a person
who is like vested into in in in
containers and in in platform engineering and Kubernetes
and all that,
obviously, you have to be on the lookout
of what's coming and and and what's gonna
change this this ecosystem and and whether WebAssembly
is something I should, like, focus on, like,
very much or it will be handled for
me by the tools I have already. And
that's sort of the question I'm I'm trying
to gauge here. And also, like, a very
similar situation I was in, like, six five,
six years ago, 02/1718,
then Lambda,
Amazon Lambda came out and there was a
huge push. Like, everything
everything is gonna be a function. Everything is
gonna be Lambda and your containers are already,
deprecated even though you haven't really used them
in production. And then, you know, you you
have to sort of put these news somewhere,
and, and then I put Lambda into the,
yeah. Well, could be useful for certain things
kind of box,
but, but not for me, kind of box.
And and I'm just following the the the
WebAssembly news from a certain distance. And then
when I'm hearing, you know, like news, I
try to sort of, like, match against my
previous assumption.
Does it change something? Does it, like, reassure
me? And and and I'm picking up some
some news here and there. And and the
thing that you said as well, that WebAssembly
is more like an SDK. So it's it
won't be like a general purpose
application modernization
platform.
It's more like a a really cool tool
that allows you to do amazing things like
much less hassle than with containers. And overall,
you can have a much better experience than
all the container people.
But it's you have to be sort of
in a in a privileged position to actually
use these technologies or you're you're you're you're
getting where I'm I'm I'm trying to go
with this. Right?
Yeah. Don't imagine it's an easy sale.
Like, I can imagine Laura
going back into the office tomorrow and going,
I just had this amazing conversation about WebAssembly,
and we should just rewrite everything now. Like,
it's just Everybody's gonna look at me like
I grew three heads.
I mean, like, the the fact that I'm
looking at is so there's a couple things.
One, every time somebody comes up with something
that's gonna revolutionize
the system, my question always is,
why are we making another tool versus dealing
with some of the underlying problems?
Now in this case, it does feel like
it's dealing with some of the underlying problems,
absolutely.
But
I'm I'm always a little skeptical when somebody
says, here, just use this tool, and it
fixes your problem. Always skeptical of that because
to me, you're just creating more problems. It's
kinda like the x k c d except
backwards.
You know, how many standards do we have?
Oh, we have another standard. Well, it's how
many problems do we have? Oh, we can
make it so it's only one problem. No.
Now we just added another problem to it.
So
I'm I'm always a little worried about that
because to me, it's more about we're abstracting
away so many layers as we as we
move into containerization and things like that.
As we've as we have moved into containerization,
we attempted to abstract away networking.
Well, we added virtual networking.
Good luck remembering both. We, you know, we
try to do all of these different things.
So when I hear that, okay. Well, we're
now taking all these things and breaking them
out into modules that now you can, like,
plug and play and change all this. I'm
like, okay. So we have regular networking, virtual
networking. Now do we have another version of
networking? Is it always gonna be DNS in
the end? Like, that's always my question when
I see these, especially thinking through all of
the different layers beyond just I'm developing my
application to how am I gonna run it?
How am I gonna maintain it? What infrastructure
do I need to be on top of?
How does this affect that infrastructure? What am
I gonna do here? So that's my question
to you is
why are we making another tool, and do
we really need a platform for any of
this? Like, maybe I'm just going down the
rabbit hole here, but I'll ask this to
both of you because both of you are
talking about platforms like they're the best thing
ever, and my response is, why?
So,
you know, when it comes to WebAssembly, that's
part of where my skepticism comes in. And
that's why I'm in the neutral zone of,
like, cautiously optimistic that maybe it'll fix some
things, but what new problems is it actually
introducing to me? Yeah. You were in a
neutral zone, but now it's like, et to
Laura. You've just went complete build skeptic on
me. So
I
am playing the devil's advocate here. Let's hear
it.
So let's let's address all of these things
at the same time. I'm gonna do my
best. So, Lasse mentioned serverless. Right?
I think you were right to be skeptical
about serverless.
The idea like, serverless was was really promising
when Lambda launched. The idea is that we
could take JavaScript codes, run it in a
VA isolate, super fast performance,
do lots of really good things. It's amazing.
However,
people wanted to do more in Lambda. And
now Lambdas are essentially they started doing, like,
container layer stuff where you could, like, pull
layers from containers and bootstrapping them, and so
you could run other commands, use other languages.
Now they're all running in, like, Firecracker virtual
machines.
And it's really just got to the point
where you could do some really powerful stuff
with it, but you then have to kinda
go all in on AWS. And that means
paying for other managed services using their VPCs,
using their managed databases, using their everything. Is
it right? I'm not a big fan of
that approach. I think that's probably helped several
of us back. Now we do have open
source things, but they're all container based. And
again, we can't fix the code start time
with the containers. Mean, speak to Alex Ellis.
He's been trying to fix this for open
fast for, like, what, seven years.
The problem is they have to start using
proxies in the containers
to then keep your containers long running and
scaling them on demand based on traffic. And
there's a whole bunch of complexity there in
that too.
And if we just use WebAssembly, people can
write in their own languages, compile to common
target, be in retro components, and you get
a lot of the benefits. However,
I don't think applications should be full serverless.
I don't think applications should be full WebAssembly
either, which does resemble the serverless model. Right?
Request and spin it up, shut it down,
keep on trucking.
I think we still need containers. I still
I'm never gonna run a WebAssembly database. I
don't think so at least anyway. I mean,
I'm always gonna use post credits and that's
gonna be a long running container based application
that does Linux file system stuff. I want
that to be performing. That means hooking into
the kernel and doing all bunch of other
things. Same stream processing, you know, Kafka's red
pandas, all this other stuff. And if it
was state, I probably would just want it
to be in the container.
But I think user facing stuff, asynchronous stuff,
reactive event driven stuff, probably can and hopefully
will be at some point built on WebAssembly's
parameters.
But that's from the cloud native point of
view. I'm gonna loop it right back again
to, like, speak about Gimlet in a weird
way. It's like you're kinda talking about WebAssembly
skepticism. But WebAssembly doesn't need to just be
like serverless functions. It can actually be used
to extend applications.
Like, imagine being able to run your Gimlet
container inside of your Kubernetes cluster and you
want to allow people like me who, you
know, I'm gonna use Gimlet and do this
thing. But to change the behavior, extend the
functionality, build in different source transformations to the
the entire GitHub's pipeline, whatever.
You don't wanna just say cars and bring
in more containers. It's just over very bloated.
But you could provide a WebAssembly module with
a certain interface and say, I'm gonna call
this function in your module. I'm gonna pass
you on a string of bytes, which is
all the YAML. You can do your transformations
and then spit it back out. And we're
seeing this with desktop applications.
Will Versus code be WebAssembly extension point at
some point in the future? Yes.
Helix, one of the terminal
editors has a WebAssembly in potential. There's Zellage,
which is a terminal multiplexer retina rust that
has a WebAssembly extension point.
I think it's just a really
because that runtime is so ubiquitous, it doesn't
rely on Linux or architectures or anything like
that. We can stick it anywhere and everywhere.
Like, your iOS and your Android phones could
all be running WebAssembly at some point under
the hood with a send wrapper and a
thread that's just the native components.
So I think the versatility of it pushes
it beyond what we've seen with Lambda and
serverless. It could still provide that style of
functionality and execution,
but the promise is much more vast and
I think that will appeal to developers.
Not that you can ever learn, a single
language and a single completion target and build
every application of the world, but I think
WebAssembly gets you pretty close. Yeah. I I
do I do like the idea that
someone who has learned a language and learned
it well, not like just, you know, taking
a boot camp, but learned it really, really
well, will be able to actually build something
without having to know all about virtualization and
containers and this and that and the other,
or how AWS works, how to find your
way through all the AWS mess and just
deploy some kind of serverless thing. I do
like that idea. That is the one thing
that I was gonna say is probably the
biggest benefit to WebAssembly to me is that
it removes a lot of roadblocks from people
trying to get something out the door or,
like, people wanting to work. Like, I'm a
I'm a Python person. David's a Go person.
I'm not a Go person. Mostly.
You take that back. Okay. Fine. Pick a
language. I'm just trying to pick something. I'm
trying to help you here, dude.
But going through and saying, like, if the
two of us wanna build a application together,
I can work in my language because I
know it very well. David can work in
his language because he knows it very well,
and we can compile something together. I do
like that without having to know about containers
and how to make everything work in between.
That's kinda nice. Yeah. Definitely.
I have written a lot of Go code
just for the record. I'm not saying that
for bad about Go. I know. I I
do like writing It's mostly because when David
and I worked together, it was one of
these things. Like, whenever my Go broke, I
went to David and went, help me. It's
not working. Well, yeah, I'm not in the
unfortunate position that I work with so many
languages that I'm terrible at all of them.
Like, I I don't really feel that I'm
good at any language anymore.
I I every time I write Rust, I
put Go in there. Every time I write
Go, there's some Rust in there. And every
time I write some PHP, there's some Haskell.
And I'm just like, can't remember how to
do anything in any language at all. But
that So what happens when you try to
write Python?
I I mean, that's when I just asked
you for help.
I can't even keep up with Python. Like,
I was told that is no longer relevant.
I should be using poetry. Black's been replaced
by something called ref, and I'm just like,
what? Like, the tool chains have changed in
twelve months. Yep. So
Yeah. Miracles.
Anyway,
sorry. Let's look at told you. Once we
start talking, we're it's we're not it's not
even gonna be about WebAssembly anymore. We're just
gonna go off in some random tangent.
Alright. I mean, we're how how are we
feeling about WebAssembly right now? I know I've
kind of rambled a lot and tried to
hopefully distill some of the good things about
WebAssembly. I I mean, I hope it's had
a positive impact in where we're gonna sit.
Like me, Laszlo?
Yeah.
Yeah. Okay. Sure. So I I like where
this conversation is going. Containers are not gonna
be replaced with WebAssembly.
That's that's a good good
outcome for me.
Plus, I think you conferred to me that
that there are these WebAssembly primitives and then
you build the castle from from those primitives.
And and I actually liked the interoperability
kind of
use case that you that you described.
I also like to bring in another use
case like
with containers and and Kubernetes and platforms. We
are all want to build the next Heroku
or at least for for some time, we
were trying. Yeah.
And maybe it's not gonna happen for Kubernetes,
but it's gonna happen for Web Assembly. I
I can more easily see that because it's
a it's a it's a limited problem space
to solve. There are these primitives and so
on,
a lot less ground to cover. So perhaps
maybe the next Heroku is gonna be WebAssembly.
And I'm gonna be cool with that.
Yeah.
I think it would be a lot easier
to build the next Rawkode on WebAssembly. I
mean, if we look at all the people
trying to build platforms today based on containers,
I mean, there's a
I mean, it's it's not easy. Right? Like,
people give you your code as a container
and you just run it somewhere and the
job's done. But, actually, there's a whole lot
more to it. Like, let's take a look
at running an application in Kubernetes today, right,
in 2023.
Yes. Can you rate a deployment YAML with
an image tag and just run it? Sure.
Why not? Is
that a good idea? Probably not.
You need network policies. You need seccomp profiles.
If you have SE Linux, AppArmor, Evan running
on a host, you have to satisfy those
constraints too.
You gotta run your container not as a
root user. If you then consumes persistent volume
claims, you've then got to juggle the permissions
to make sure that you've got great access
to it if you need it.
There's
I mean, that's just you think that your
service machine, your retry logic for network requests.
I think WebAssembly,
a lot of those disappear because the sandbox
isn't is, you know, is is not politics.
It's not the Linux kernel. It's not a
Linux elf binary. It's its own thing. Different
characteristics is built with sandboxing in mind.
It's really difficult to do hard things in
it, which could be a stumbling block too,
but that's another thing. But
I do like where, you know, Docker I
mean, let's in fact, we didn't even address
that. Right?
Who invented containers?
Docker.
What has every Docker feature request included
in the last
12 well, okay. Who made containers acceptable? Wait.
Who made containers accessible? Okay. Okay. I was
gonna say, hold on a second. There was
more to containers before Docker came along, but
Docker didn't make it as a whole. Before.
Blah blah blah. Nobody was using them as
a Google. Come on. So Docker's what put
it in people's hands. And, you know, if
we look at the last twelve months of
Docker releases,
they're all WebAssembly based. Right? It's all about
bringing in
WebAssembly support to Docker desktop, to Docker Compose,
to the Docker Hub, shipping images with Docker
build build and push and pull.
The fact that they are so heavily invested
in containers, they need containers for them to
be a profitable successful company, which they've struggled
with. And they're now investing all this effort
into WebAssembly.
It's just that little tick for me that
this is something that has a bit of
longevity to it, something that a company like
Docker is investing in. They see the promise
of containers and WebAssembly set by site. And
that's yeah. Like, it's a big tech. I
think that just affirms everything that I need
to know
about my joy of working and promoting WebAssembly
too. And and just maybe maybe a final
thought that actually I'm I'm picking up that
news as well because, of course, I'm I
have to, like, hedge my bet. Like, I'm
in containers and, you know, I'm building
platforms for companies and stuff and I know
containers. Should I, like, learn the WebAssembly world?
And and I'm hearing this news that, hey,
I actually,
maybe today, I have no idea that I
could run a WebAssembly container on, you know,
on on container d or maybe even in
Kubernetes.
It's probably not true. So please
tell me what's the state of this. But
if if things converge like this,
that's actually very good for, you know, both
the old and the new world. So I'm
I'm pretty pleased with this direction.
So the good news is that you can
run your WebAssembly side by side with containers
and Docker or Kubernetes using the container called
run Wazee.
And the way that this works is it
runs a container with a long running process,
which is the Wasm run time. So that'll
be Wasm Edge, Wasm Cloud, Wasm or Wasm
Time, whatever one you choose to use.
And at the event, spin up the
WebAssembly modules and response to request coming in.
Actually, not dissimilar to what, like, OpenFuzz does
with their
Well, it should be proxy that opens and
runs functions. So it's the kind of the
best of both. I mean, you still need
the concept of container for container d. It
still needs to run a long run-in process
and hook up networking and handle all the
permissions and the services and all that all
that boring stuff. Right? The plumbing.
But your WebAssembly module just has taken a
little thing that's inside of it and gets
executed every time when you request something.
And it works really well. There's a little
bit of a faff right now.
So the container, the shim shims out to
the host to run the WebAssembly,
WasmR, WasmTime, etcetera, runtime.
So you have to make sure that your
nodes have those binaries available right now. There
is a project called k Wasm. It's available
at kWasm.sh
from the liquid reply people in Germany.
Runs as a daemon set, and every time
a new node comes into your cluster, it
literally just downloads all the binaries and sticks
them into the user local bin for you.
Shouldn't need to exist, and they hope to
deprecate it at some point. But for now,
it's the easiest way to get started. So,
yeah, you you kinda can. And you know
what? It's nice. Like,
the OCI image that your WebAssembly module is
kinda pushed with is teeny. It's, like, five
meg
to eight meg depending on the complexity of
your application. At least that's what I've seen
when I've taken my real world Web Assembly
and pushed it. I mean, if we compare
that to a container image,
it's rare that they're less than what? Fifty,
sixty meg. And then in the worst case,
I've seen images with gigs gigs and gigs
and gigs inside of them. Just because, again,
optimizing container images is not something that you
do by default. Right? You do from Ubuntu,
apt install, everything in the world that I
need, compel this thing, and then execute a
tiny little banner at the end. You then
have to go learn, oh, multistage builds and
I can chain commands together to remove the
cache and I can do all these weird
things. Right? You've been in a container space
long enough. You've done all of this. You
have to learn it the hard way. Whereas
the WebAssembly is just
build,
take a little module, off you go. It's
quite nice. So I'm curious based on everything
we've said and the fact that, Laszlo, you're
you're building Gimlet, it's a GitOps platform. Like,
do you is there anything in your head
that's thinking WebAssembly could be a value add
here and that positive? Could I extend Gimlet
in a way with this? Like, same me
up to write the first plugin, but I'm
curious. What do you think WebAssembly could could
bring to it?
So
so I learned a lot. So so I
I was the world's biggest skeptic not because
I knew stuff, but but because I'm just
picking up some news and it's still in
the same bucket. But you are mentioning some
use cases, which I don't fully see the,
the full scale of, like like what can
be achieved and stuff and how can it
be utilized. So you definitely,
put something in my mind. And when I'm
hearing news, I'm gonna put on this lens
as well. And I'm gonna try to
to entertain the thought a little bit more.
So that's and and honestly, I I learned
a ton. So it was definitely moving my
WebAssembly appreciation to the right direction, like to
the David direction.
It's still on on that that side of
the spectrum, but,
you know,
it's a it's a step.
I'll take it. Over you, Laura. There you
go.
I'm still cautiously optimistic,
mostly because I haven't had a chance to
really play with it yet. I think once
I get a chance to really get a
really tough spend some time with it, I
think is when I'm gonna start
seeing a lot of the benefits that you're
talking about. But for now, you can you
can still put me in the cautiously optimistic
camp because my
skeptical ops brain is still kinda like,
what am I missing here?
Because it can't be all rainbows and unicorns
the way he wanna paint it.
Well, what we could do We'll see. Is
take something in the calendar for twelve months
from today where we get back together and
we see where we are. Right? Alright. I
mean, I I am very open. There's your
remind me. Exactly. Right.
It'll be in my calendar any moment now.
But, yeah, I think it'd be fun just
to see what was ready, what was wrong.
Are we seeing adoption of WebAssembly, it's safe
by saying containers and Kubernetes?
I mean, I really hope so. I think
there's a lot of benefits to people adopting
this pattern. So we'll see.
There's
definitely some stuff there, and it will be
interesting to see. I think in a hybrid
cloud world, like, to be brutally honest, like,
I'm seeing a lot of hybrid cloud world
and private cloud discussions and
repatriation
of workloads,
especially in enterprises. And I'm just really curious
to see if this might,
change some things, maybe get some people off
of Java in Spring where they've been living
for decades.
Probably not.
I can dream. Please let me dream that
I don't have to do any more Java.
So so the good news is you you
learned Java twenty year or fifteen years ago.
You learned Spring
Spring Boot, like, ten years ago, and and
you can use that knowledge ten years from
now. Mean, it's it's kinda like still knowing
Fortran. Right? I can always find a job
knowing Fortran
even fifty years from now. Who knows?
David, here here's my statement. When they make
Fortran
a WebAssembly,
then we know it has
reached the big time or jumped the shark.
I'm not sure which one.
It exists.
There you go.
No.
Sorry to burst that bubble so quickly, but
now you're that's it. You're you're converted.
Yeah. I mean, the language support is ridiculous.
If you just Google for WebAssembly supported languages.
Like, the slide I had up, I talked
two weeks ago, I had 40 languages on
it, and that was me just picking the
the best ones and the worst ones. Like,
the fact that brain fuck can be compelled
to WebAssembly tells you everything that you need
to know. So
It does tell me actually a lot that
I need to know. Okay.
Actually, that really does. Alright.
Loll code? Rockstar? Anyway. I don't think Rawkstar
does. I I think that's been done. Okay.
But I'm sure we can hang down and
tell him to get all over that. So
There we go. Alright. Awesome. Thank you both
for entertaining my
I don't know. Not rants, but, you know,
WebAssembly,
admiration,
adoration,
whatever the word may be. I'm not entirely
sure.
I wanna put little stickers on your video
of, like, little fan,
like, signs.
Yeah. If you if you wanna edit, you
can feel free. I I'm happy to give
that up. So,
Laszlo, do you wanna do you wanna share
any links to your projects, your Twitters, your
GitHub, your LinkedIn, anything like that before we
wrap up today? This is the shameless plug
moment, so take take it away. Yeah. Sure.
Shameless plug. Do it. So
I I only have Twitter, and I'm so
sorry about that. So that's Laslow CPH.
And I know there are there are these
other platforms. And I'm also a Twitter Blue,
which I don't know how to get rid
of. So please don't don't judge me. I
said, like, I did that through. I said,
don't because I wanted to do it. I
wanted to sorry. I I wanted to take
advantage of, like, the more than ten minutes,
ten eighty p video because I thought, oh,
I could push all the video through Twitter.
And then I canceled it because I was
like, this is shit. And Elon Musk is
well doing really stupid things with the platform.
And it it didn't go away. It stuck
with me. I stopped paying, and I had
it for, like, three months. Exactly.
Exactly. It's there. It's there. It's like they're
reviewing, like, every, I don't know, forever.
Anyway, so it's Lasso CPH on Twitter and
Gimlet.io
on the InterVabs.
So, please check this out. And, yeah. There
we go. Thank you for, for having me
and, teaching us WebAssembly.
Alright. Appreciate you. Thanks for coming on. Thank
you, Laura.
Thanks for joining us. If you wanna keep
up with us, consider subscribing to the podcast
on your favorite podcasting app or even go
to cloudnativecompass.fm.
And if you want us to talk with
someone specific or cover a specific topic,
reach out to us on any social media
platform.
Until next time when exploring the cloud native
landscape
on 3.
On 3. 1,
2,
3.
Don't forget your compass. Forget your compass.